PATTERNS.md, before:

# Claude Cleaner Pattern Reference

This document provides a comprehensive reference of all file patterns that Claude Cleaner can match when using the `--include-all-common-patterns` flag.

> [!NOTE]
> The patterns listed here are only used when `--include-all-common-patterns` is enabled. Without this flag, only the [standard patterns](README.md#files-removed-standard-mode) are used.

## Pattern Matching System

Claude Cleaner uses **exact basename matching** for safety:

- **`CLAUDE.md`** matches only files named exactly `CLAUDE.md` (not `CLAUDE.md.backup` or `MY-CLAUDE.md`)
- **`.claude/`** matches only directories named exactly `.claude` (not `.claude2` or `my.claude`)
- **`.vscode/claude.json`** matches the exact path `.vscode/claude.json` only

Patterns use wildcards (`*`) to match variations:

- `claude-session*` matches `claude-session`, `claude-session-123`, `claude-session.json`, etc.
- `claude*.json` matches `claude.json`, `claude-config.json`, `claude-workspace.json`, etc.

### Matching Examples

**File Pattern Matching:**

```
Pattern: CLAUDE.md
✅ Matches:   CLAUDE.md, docs/CLAUDE.md, src/utils/CLAUDE.md
❌ No match:  CLAUDE.md.backup, MY-CLAUDE.md, claude.md
```

**Wildcard Pattern Matching:**

```
Pattern: claude-session*
✅ Matches:   claude-session, claude-session-123, claude-session.json
❌ No match:  session-claude, my-claude-session
```

**Directory Pattern Matching:**

```
Pattern: .claude/
✅ Matches:   .claude/, src/.claude/, docs/.claude/
❌ No match:  .claude2/, my.claude/, claude/
```

**Specific Path Matching:**

```
Pattern: .vscode/claude.json
✅ Matches:   .vscode/claude.json (exact path only)
❌ No match:  .vscode/claude.config.json, claude.json
```

## Extended Pattern Categories

### Configuration Files

Files that configure Claude behavior and settings:

```
claude*.json
claude*.yaml
claude*.yml
claude*.toml
claude*.ini
claude*.config
claude-config*
claude-settings*
claude-workspace*
claude-env*
```

**Examples:** `claude.json`, `claude-config.yaml`, `claude-settings.toml`, `claude-workspace.json`

### Session & State Files

Files that store Claude session state and history:

```
claude-session*
claude-state*
claude-cache*
claude-history*
```

**Examples:** `claude-session-123.json`, `claude-state.db`, `claude-cache/`, `claude-history.log`

### Temporary & Working Files

Temporary files and working directories:

```
claude-temp*
claude-tmp*
claude-work*
claude-scratch*
claude-draft*
claude*.bak
claude*.backup
claude*.old
claude*.orig
claude*.save
claude-output*
claude-result*
claude-analysis*
claude-report*
```

**Examples:** `claude-temp.txt`, `claude-work/`, `claude-draft-v1.md`, `claude.bak`, `claude-output.json`

### Process Files

Files related to Claude process management:

```
claude*.lock
claude*.pid
claude*.socket
claude-lock*
claude-process*
claude-run*
```

**Examples:** `claude.lock`, `claude-process.pid`, `claude-run.socket`

### Debug & Diagnostic Files

Debugging, profiling, and diagnostic output:

```
claude-debug*
claude-trace*
claude-profile*
claude-diagnostic*
claude*.debug
claude*.trace
claude*.profile
claude*.diagnostic
```

**Examples:** `claude-debug.log`, `claude-trace-001.txt`, `claude-profile.json`, `claude.debug`

### Export & Archive Files

Data exports, archives, dumps, and snapshots:

```
claude-export*
claude-archive*
claude-dump*
claude-snapshot*
```

**Examples:** `claude-export-2024.zip`, `claude-archive.tar.gz`, `claude-dump.sql`, `claude-snapshot.json`

### IDE Integration Files

IDE-specific Claude configuration files:

```
.vscode/*claude*
.idea/*claude*
.eclipse/*claude*
```

**Examples:** `.vscode/claude-settings.json`, `.idea/claude-config.xml`, `.eclipse/claude.properties`

### Directories

Claude-related directories matched by exact name:

```
claude-workspace
claude-project
claude-sessions
claude-temp
claude-cache
claude-data
```

Plus any directory containing `/.claude-` or `/claude_` in its path.

**Examples:** `claude-workspace/`, `project/.claude-temp/`, `src/claude_output/`

### Documentation Files

Claude-generated documentation:

```
claude-notes*.md
claude-notes*.txt
claude-notes*.rst
claude-docs*.md
claude-docs*.txt
claude-docs*.rst
claude-readme*.md
claude-readme*.txt
claude-readme*.rst
claude-instructions*.md
claude-instructions*.txt
claude-instructions*.rst
.claude-*.md
.claude-*.txt
.claude-*.rst
```

**Examples:** `claude-notes.md`, `claude-docs-v2.md`, `claude-readme.txt`, `.claude-instructions.md`

### Scripts & Executables

Claude scripts and executable files:

```
claude-script*
claude-tool*
claude-utility*
claude-helper*
claude*.sh
claude*.bat
claude*.ps1
claude*.py
claude*.js
claude*.ts
```

**Examples:** `claude-script.sh`, `claude-tool.py`, `claude-helper.js`, `claude-init.bat`

### Hidden/Dotfiles

Hidden configuration files and dotfiles:

```
.claude[a-zA-Z0-9]*
```

**Examples:** `.clauderc`, `.claude-config`, `.claudeignore`, `.claude123`

### Numbered/Versioned Files

Files with numbers or version indicators:

```
claude*[0-9]*
claude*v[0-9]*
```

**Examples:** `claude-v1.json`, `claude-session-001.log`, `claude2.config`, `claude-report-v3.md`

## Pattern Safety Features

### Exact Matching

Claude Cleaner uses exact basename matching to prevent false positives:

- **Safe:** `CLAUDE.md` will not match `MY-CLAUDE.md` or `CLAUDE.md.backup`
- **Safe:** `.claude/` will not match `.claude2/` or `my.claude/`
- **Safe:** Patterns only match when the filename/dirname matches exactly (before any extension)

### Pattern Wildcards

Wildcards (`*`) enable flexible matching while maintaining safety:

- `claude-session*` matches any file starting with exactly `claude-session`
- `claude*.json` matches any `.json` file starting with exactly `claude`
- `*claude*` would be dangerous and is **not used** by this tool

## Usage Examples

### Preview Extended Patterns

Always preview before executing to see exactly what will be removed:

```bash
# Preview comprehensive cleanup (recommended first)
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --verbose
```

### Execute Extended Pattern Cleanup

After reviewing the dry-run output:

```bash
# Execute complete cleanup - find ALL known/possible Claude patterns
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --execute
```

### Files-Only Extended Cleanup

Remove files only, preserving commit messages:

```bash
# Preview comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --verbose

# Execute comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --execute
```

## When to Use Extended Patterns

Use `--include-all-common-patterns` when:

- **Preparing repositories for public distribution** - Remove all traces of Claude usage
- **Long-running projects** - Clean up accumulated Claude artifacts over time
- **Complete cleanup needed** - Comprehensive removal of all Claude-related files
- **Unknown artifacts** - Find Claude files you didn't know existed

> [!WARNING]
> The `--include-all-common-patterns` flag finds _many_ more files than standard mode. Always review the dry-run output first before using `--execute`.

## Performance Optimization: Batched Operations

Claude Cleaner optimizes performance by **batching multiple file and directory removals into a single BFG Repo-Cleaner invocation** rather than running BFG separately for each pattern. This significantly reduces execution time for repositories with multiple Claude artifacts.

### How Batching Works

**Single BFG Pass:**

```bash
# Instead of N separate BFG calls:
bfg --delete-files CLAUDE.md repo.git
bfg --delete-files claude.json repo.git
bfg --delete-folders .claude repo.git

# Claude Cleaner batches into one call:
bfg --delete-files {CLAUDE.md,claude.json} --delete-folders .claude repo.git
```

### Filename Limitations for Batching

Due to BFG's glob syntax requirements, certain special characters in filenames cannot be batched:

**Restricted Characters:**

- `,` (comma) - Pattern separator
- `{` `}` (braces) - Pattern delimiter
- `*` `?` (wildcards) - Glob metacharacters
- `[` `]` (brackets) - Character class syntax
- `;` `|` `&` (shell metacharacters)
- `"` `'` (quotes)
- `` (space) - Only when batching multiple patterns

**Handling Special Cases:**

- **Single files with spaces**: Processed without braces, spaces allowed
- **Multiple files (batched)**: Spaces not allowed, will fail validation
- **Invalid characters**: Tool will report error with actionable guidance

**Example Error:**

```
Cannot batch BFG operations: filename 'my file.md' contains special character ' '
that would break BFG glob syntax. Process this file separately or rename it without spaces.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Standard Claude patterns (CLAUDE.md, .claude/, etc.) do not contain special characters and batch efficiently. Extended patterns may occasionally encounter files with special characters.

## Related Documentation

- [README.md](README.md) - Main user documentation and quick start guide
- [DEV.md](DEV.md) - Development guide and testing information

Commit message:

feat!: preserve CLAUDE.md instruction files by default (#20)
## Summary

This PR implements a breaking change to preserve `CLAUDE.md` instruction
files by default, making the tool safer while still allowing users to
remove them when needed.

## Breaking Change

**BREAKING CHANGE:** `CLAUDE.md` instruction files are now **preserved
by default** to keep project documentation intact.

### New Behavior

- **Default mode**: CLAUDE.md files are excluded from removal
- **With `--include-instruction-files`**: CLAUDE.md files are removed
- **With `--include-all-common-patterns`**: CLAUDE.md files are removed
(comprehensive cleanup)

## Changes

### Implementation
- Add `--include-instruction-files` flag to CLI options
- Add `includeInstructionFiles` property to `FileCleanerOptions`
- Update `isClaudeFile()` to check flag before including CLAUDE.md
- CLAUDE.md removed only when flag is set or comprehensive mode is
enabled

### Documentation
- Add breaking change notice to README.md
- Add breaking change notice to PATTERNS.md
- Update usage examples showing new flag
- Add section explaining how to remove instruction files

### Testing
- Fix all tests expecting CLAUDE.md to be removed by default
- Add new test validating `--include-instruction-files` flag
- Update integration tests to use flag where CLAUDE.md removal is needed
- All 64 test suites (268 steps) passing ✅

## Rationale

CLAUDE.md files contain valuable project documentation and instructions
that help Claude Code understand the codebase. Preserving them by
default prevents accidental loss of this documentation while still
allowing explicit removal when needed.

## Test plan

- [x] All existing tests updated and passing
- [x] New test added for `--include-instruction-files` flag
- [x] Manual testing with dry-run mode
- [x] Verified `--include-all-common-patterns` includes CLAUDE.md

PATTERNS.md, after:

# Claude Cleaner Pattern Reference

This document provides a comprehensive reference of all file patterns that Claude Cleaner can match when using the `--include-all-common-patterns` flag.

> [!NOTE]
> The patterns listed here are only used when `--include-all-common-patterns` is enabled. Without this flag, only the [standard patterns](README.md#files-removed-standard-mode) are used.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Breaking Change (v0.3.0):** `CLAUDE.md` instruction files are now **preserved by default**. Use `--include-instruction-files` or `--include-all-common-patterns` to remove them.

## Pattern Matching System

Claude Cleaner uses **exact basename matching** for safety:

- **`CLAUDE.md`** matches only files named exactly `CLAUDE.md` (not `CLAUDE.md.backup` or `MY-CLAUDE.md`)
- **`.claude/`** matches only directories named exactly `.claude` (not `.claude2` or `my.claude`)
- **`.vscode/claude.json`** matches the exact path `.vscode/claude.json` only

Patterns use wildcards (`*`) to match variations:

- `claude-session*` matches `claude-session`, `claude-session-123`, `claude-session.json`, etc.
- `claude*.json` matches `claude.json`, `claude-config.json`, `claude-workspace.json`, etc.

### Matching Examples

**File Pattern Matching:**

```
Pattern: CLAUDE.md
✅ Matches:   CLAUDE.md, docs/CLAUDE.md, src/utils/CLAUDE.md
❌ No match:  CLAUDE.md.backup, MY-CLAUDE.md, claude.md
```

**Wildcard Pattern Matching:**

```
Pattern: claude-session*
✅ Matches:   claude-session, claude-session-123, claude-session.json
❌ No match:  session-claude, my-claude-session
```

**Directory Pattern Matching:**

```
Pattern: .claude/
✅ Matches:   .claude/, src/.claude/, docs/.claude/
❌ No match:  .claude2/, my.claude/, claude/
```

**Specific Path Matching:**

```
Pattern: .vscode/claude.json
✅ Matches:   .vscode/claude.json (exact path only)
❌ No match:  .vscode/claude.config.json, claude.json
```

## Extended Pattern Categories

### Configuration Files

Files that configure Claude behavior and settings:

```
claude*.json
claude*.yaml
claude*.yml
claude*.toml
claude*.ini
claude*.config
claude-config*
claude-settings*
claude-workspace*
claude-env*
```

**Examples:** `claude.json`, `claude-config.yaml`, `claude-settings.toml`, `claude-workspace.json`

### Session & State Files

Files that store Claude session state and history:

```
claude-session*
claude-state*
claude-cache*
claude-history*
```

**Examples:** `claude-session-123.json`, `claude-state.db`, `claude-cache/`, `claude-history.log`

### Temporary & Working Files

Temporary files and working directories:

```
claude-temp*
claude-tmp*
claude-work*
claude-scratch*
claude-draft*
claude*.bak
claude*.backup
claude*.old
claude*.orig
claude*.save
claude-output*
claude-result*
claude-analysis*
claude-report*
```

**Examples:** `claude-temp.txt`, `claude-work/`, `claude-draft-v1.md`, `claude.bak`, `claude-output.json`

### Process Files

Files related to Claude process management:

```
claude*.lock
claude*.pid
claude*.socket
claude-lock*
claude-process*
claude-run*
```

**Examples:** `claude.lock`, `claude-process.pid`, `claude-run.socket`

### Debug & Diagnostic Files

Debugging, profiling, and diagnostic output:

```
claude-debug*
claude-trace*
claude-profile*
claude-diagnostic*
claude*.debug
claude*.trace
claude*.profile
claude*.diagnostic
```

**Examples:** `claude-debug.log`, `claude-trace-001.txt`, `claude-profile.json`, `claude.debug`

### Export & Archive Files

Data exports, archives, dumps, and snapshots:

```
claude-export*
claude-archive*
claude-dump*
claude-snapshot*
```

**Examples:** `claude-export-2024.zip`, `claude-archive.tar.gz`, `claude-dump.sql`, `claude-snapshot.json`

### IDE Integration Files

IDE-specific Claude configuration files:

```
.vscode/*claude*
.idea/*claude*
.eclipse/*claude*
```

**Examples:** `.vscode/claude-settings.json`, `.idea/claude-config.xml`, `.eclipse/claude.properties`

### Directories

Claude-related directories matched by exact name:

```
claude-workspace
claude-project
claude-sessions
claude-temp
claude-cache
claude-data
```

Plus any directory containing `/.claude-` or `/claude_` in its path.

**Examples:** `claude-workspace/`, `project/.claude-temp/`, `src/claude_output/`

### Documentation Files

Claude-generated documentation:

```
claude-notes*.md
claude-notes*.txt
claude-notes*.rst
claude-docs*.md
claude-docs*.txt
claude-docs*.rst
claude-readme*.md
claude-readme*.txt
claude-readme*.rst
claude-instructions*.md
claude-instructions*.txt
claude-instructions*.rst
.claude-*.md
.claude-*.txt
.claude-*.rst
```

**Examples:** `claude-notes.md`, `claude-docs-v2.md`, `claude-readme.txt`, `.claude-instructions.md`

### Scripts & Executables

Claude scripts and executable files:

```
claude-script*
claude-tool*
claude-utility*
claude-helper*
claude*.sh
claude*.bat
claude*.ps1
claude*.py
claude*.js
claude*.ts
```

**Examples:** `claude-script.sh`, `claude-tool.py`, `claude-helper.js`, `claude-init.bat`

### Hidden/Dotfiles

Hidden configuration files and dotfiles:

```
.claude[a-zA-Z0-9]*
```

**Examples:** `.clauderc`, `.claude-config`, `.claudeignore`, `.claude123`

### Numbered/Versioned Files

Files with numbers or version indicators:

```
claude*[0-9]*
claude*v[0-9]*
```

**Examples:** `claude-v1.json`, `claude-session-001.log`, `claude2.config`, `claude-report-v3.md`

## Pattern Safety Features

### Exact Matching

Claude Cleaner uses exact basename matching to prevent false positives:

- **Safe:** `CLAUDE.md` will not match `MY-CLAUDE.md` or `CLAUDE.md.backup`
- **Safe:** `.claude/` will not match `.claude2/` or `my.claude/`
- **Safe:** Patterns only match when the filename/dirname matches exactly (before any extension)

### Pattern Wildcards

Wildcards (`*`) enable flexible matching while maintaining safety:

- `claude-session*` matches any file starting with exactly `claude-session`
- `claude*.json` matches any `.json` file starting with exactly `claude`
- `*claude*` would be dangerous and is **not used** by this tool

## Usage Examples

### Preview Extended Patterns

Always preview before executing to see exactly what will be removed:

```bash
# Preview comprehensive cleanup (recommended first)
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --verbose
```

### Execute Extended Pattern Cleanup

After reviewing the dry-run output:

```bash
# Execute complete cleanup - find ALL known/possible Claude patterns
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --execute
```

### Files-Only Extended Cleanup

Remove files only, preserving commit messages:

```bash
# Preview comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --verbose

# Execute comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --execute
```

## When to Use Extended Patterns

Use `--include-all-common-patterns` when:

- **Preparing repositories for public distribution** - Remove all traces of Claude usage
- **Long-running projects** - Clean up accumulated Claude artifacts over time
- **Complete cleanup needed** - Comprehensive removal of all Claude-related files
- **Unknown artifacts** - Find Claude files you didn't know existed

> [!WARNING]
> The `--include-all-common-patterns` flag finds _many_ more files than standard mode. Always review the dry-run output first before using `--execute`.

## Performance Optimization: Batched Operations

Claude Cleaner optimizes performance by **batching multiple file and directory removals into a single BFG Repo-Cleaner invocation** rather than running BFG separately for each pattern. This significantly reduces execution time for repositories with multiple Claude artifacts.

### How Batching Works

**Single BFG Pass:**

```bash
# Instead of N separate BFG calls:
bfg --delete-files CLAUDE.md repo.git
bfg --delete-files claude.json repo.git
bfg --delete-folders .claude repo.git

# Claude Cleaner batches into one call:
bfg --delete-files {CLAUDE.md,claude.json} --delete-folders .claude repo.git
```

### Filename Limitations for Batching

Due to BFG's glob syntax requirements, certain special characters in filenames cannot be batched:

**Restricted Characters:**

- `,` (comma) - Pattern separator
- `{` `}` (braces) - Pattern delimiter
- `*` `?` (wildcards) - Glob metacharacters
- `[` `]` (brackets) - Character class syntax
- `;` `|` `&` (shell metacharacters)
- `"` `'` (quotes)
- `` (space) - Only when batching multiple patterns

**Handling Special Cases:**

- **Single files with spaces**: Processed without braces, spaces allowed
- **Multiple files (batched)**: Spaces not allowed, will fail validation
- **Invalid characters**: Tool will report error with actionable guidance

**Example Error:**

```
Cannot batch BFG operations: filename 'my file.md' contains special character ' '
that would break BFG glob syntax. Process this file separately or rename it without spaces.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Standard Claude patterns (CLAUDE.md, .claude/, etc.) do not contain special characters and batch efficiently. Extended patterns may occasionally encounter files with special characters.

## Related Documentation

- [README.md](README.md) - Main user documentation and quick start guide
- [DEV.md](DEV.md) - Development guide and testing information
