README.md, before:

# Claude Cleaner

[![CI](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![JSR](https://jsr.io/badges/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner)](https://jsr.io/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner)
[![JSR Score](https://jsr.io/badges/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner/score)](https://jsr.io/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner)
[![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/tylerbu/claude-cleaner)](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/releases/latest)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Linux%20%7C%20macOS%20%7C%20Windows-lightgrey)](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](LICENSE)

A TypeScript/Deno tool to remove Claude artifacts from Git repositories.

> [!WARNING]
> Claude Cleaner was written primarily by Claude Sonnet 4.0 with direction and design from \@tylerbutler. Caveat emptor.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Features](#features)
- [What Gets Cleaned](#what-gets-cleaned)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)
- [Safety Features](#safety-features)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Frequently Asked Questions](#frequently-asked-questions)
- [Development](#development)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

## Overview

Claude Cleaner removes Claude-related files, commit trailers, and other artifacts from Git repository history. It combines BFG Repo-Cleaner for file removal with modern text processing for commit message cleaning.

## Features

- 🔒 **Safe**: Dry-run mode, automatic backups, and rollback capabilities
- 🌍 **Cross-platform**: Works on Windows, macOS, and Linux
- 📦 **Self-contained**: Compiles to a single binary with dependency auto-installation
- 🎯 **Flexible**: Files-only, commits-only, or full cleaning modes

## What Gets Cleaned

Claude Cleaner targets specific files and commit patterns created by Claude Code. Your regular project files and commit messages remain untouched.

### Files Removed (Standard Mode)

The tool uses **exact basename matching** for safety. For example:

- **`CLAUDE.md`** matches only files named exactly `CLAUDE.md` (not `CLAUDE.md.backup` or `MY-CLAUDE.md`)
- **`.claude/`** matches only directories named exactly `.claude` (not `.claude2` or `my.claude`)
- **`.vscode/claude.json`** matches the exact path `.vscode/claude.json` only

**Standard patterns:**

- **`CLAUDE.md`** - Project-specific Claude instructions
- **`.claude/` directories** - Claude workspace configurations
- **`claudedocs/` directories** - Claude documentation (MCP server)
- **`.serena/` directories** - Serena MCP server data
- **`.vscode/claude.json`** - VSCode Claude extension settings
- **Temporary Claude files** - Auto-generated temporary files

> [!TIP]
> Use `--include-dirs <name>` to match additional directories like `.claude-backup` or `claude-workspace` (matches by exact directory name anywhere in the repository)

### Extended Patterns (With `--include-all-common-patterns`)

This flag enables comprehensive cleanup by matching many more Claude-related file patterns across multiple categories:

- **Configuration files** - Settings, workspace, environment configs
- **Session & state** - Session data, cache, history files
- **Temporary files** - Working files, drafts, backups
- **Process files** - Lock files, PIDs, sockets
- **Debug files** - Debug logs, traces, profiles
- **Export files** - Archives, dumps, snapshots
- **IDE integration** - IDE-specific Claude configs
- **Documentation** - Notes, docs, instructions
- **Scripts** - Shell scripts, utilities, helpers
- **Hidden files** - Dotfiles like `.clauderc`
- **Versioned files** - Numbered or versioned variants

See [PATTERNS.md](PATTERNS.md) for the complete pattern reference with examples and detailed explanations.

> [!WARNING]
> The `--include-all-common-patterns` flag finds _many_ more files than standard mode. Always review the dry-run output first before using `--execute`.

### Commit Trailers Removed

- **`🤖 Generated with [Claude Code](...)`** - Claude attribution trailers
- **`Co-Authored-By: Claude <noreply@anthropic.com>`** - Co-authorship attributions
- **Other Claude attribution lines** - Additional Claude-generated metadata

## Installation

### Prerequisites

The tool automatically installs all required dependencies via [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) when using the `--auto-install` flag. Manual installation is optional.

**Auto-installed dependencies:**

- Java (for BFG Repo-Cleaner)
- sd (modern sed replacement)

### Install Claude Cleaner

```bash
# Option 1: Install from JSR (recommended)
deno install -A jsr:@tylerbu/claude-cleaner

# Option 2: Download pre-built binary
# Download from GitHub releases page

# Option 3: Build from source (requires Deno)
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/claude-cleaner  # Replace with actual repository URL
cd claude-cleaner
deno compile --allow-all --output claude-cleaner src/main.ts
```

## Quick Start

> [!WARNING]
> Always backup your repository or ensure it's committed to a remote before cleaning. While automatic backups are created, having an external backup provides extra safety.

```bash
# 1. Check dependencies (auto-installs if needed)
claude-cleaner check-deps --auto-install

# 2. Preview changes without modifying anything (dry-run is the default)
claude-cleaner

# 3. Execute cleaning (only after reviewing dry-run output)
claude-cleaner --execute
```

## Usage

### Command Line Options

```
Usage: claude-cleaner [options] [path]

Options:
  -h, --help                        Show help
  -V, --version                     Show version
  -x, --execute                     Execute changes (default: dry-run mode shows what would be changed)
  -v, --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  --auto-install                    Automatically install required dependencies
  --files-only                      Only remove Claude files (skip commit cleaning)
  --commits-only                    Only clean commit messages (skip file removal)
  --branch <branch>                 Specify branch to clean (default: HEAD)
  --include-all-common-patterns     Include ALL known common Claude patterns (for complete cleanup)
  --include-dirs <name>             Add directory name to remove (matches directories with this name anywhere)
  --include-dirs-file <file>        Read directory names from file (one pattern per line)
  --no-defaults                     Don't include default Claude patterns (use only explicit patterns)

Arguments:
  <repo-path>                       Path to Git repository (REQUIRED)

Commands:
  check-deps                        Check if all required dependencies are available
```

### Basic Examples

```bash
# Preview changes (default behavior)
claude-cleaner .

# Execute cleaning after reviewing dry-run
claude-cleaner . --execute

# Clean specific repository
claude-cleaner /path/to/repo --execute

# Preview with verbose output
claude-cleaner . --verbose

# Check what dependencies are needed
claude-cleaner check-deps
```

### Selective Cleaning

```bash
# Preview file removal only
claude-cleaner . --files-only --auto-install

# Execute file removal only
claude-cleaner . --files-only --execute --auto-install

# Preview commit message cleaning only
claude-cleaner . --commits-only --auto-install

# Execute commit cleaning on specific branch
claude-cleaner . --commits-only --execute --branch feature/my-branch --auto-install
```

### Comprehensive Cleaning

Use `--include-all-common-patterns` for complete Claude artifact removal, especially for long-running projects or when preparing repositories for distribution.

```bash
# Preview comprehensive cleanup (recommended first)
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --verbose

# Execute complete cleanup - find ALL known/possible Claude patterns
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --execute

# Preview comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --verbose

# Execute comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --execute
```

### Advanced Workflows

These examples show advanced usage patterns for power users and troubleshooting scenarios.

```bash
# Manual dependency setup (alternative to --auto-install)
mise install java@temurin-21
mise install sd
claude-cleaner --execute

# Verbose dry-run output for troubleshooting
claude-cleaner --verbose

# Check dependencies without installing
claude-cleaner check-deps

# Execute with verbose output
claude-cleaner --execute --verbose --auto-install

# Custom directory patterns (can be specified multiple times)
claude-cleaner --include-dirs "claude-backup" --include-dirs "claude-workspace"

# Read directory patterns from file
echo "claude-backup" > dirs.txt
echo "claude-workspace" >> dirs.txt
claude-cleaner --include-dirs-file dirs.txt

# Use only custom patterns (exclude defaults)
claude-cleaner --no-defaults --include-dirs "my-claude-files"
```

## How It Works

Claude Cleaner follows a systematic, safety-first approach to ensure your repository integrity while removing Claude artifacts.

### Step-by-Step Process

1. **🔍 Dependency Check** - Verifies Java, BFG Repo-Cleaner, and sd are available (auto-installs via mise if needed)
2. **✅ Repository Validation** - Ensures you're in a valid Git repository with clean working tree
3. **💾 Backup Creation** - Creates backup branches before making any changes
4. **📁 File Removal** - Uses BFG Repo-Cleaner to efficiently remove Claude files from Git history
5. **✏️ Commit Cleaning** - Uses git filter-branch + sd to clean commit messages and trailers
6. **🔎 Verification** - Validates all changes were applied correctly

### Two-Phase Cleaning Process

#### Phase 1: File Removal (`--files-only`)

- **Scans** repository for Claude files (`CLAUDE.md`, `.claude/`, `.vscode/claude.json`, etc.)
- **Removes** files from entire Git history using BFG Repo-Cleaner
- **Creates** backup before any modifications
- **Preserves** commit messages unchanged

#### Phase 2: Commit Cleaning (`--commits-only`)

- **Analyzes** commit messages for Claude trailers and attributions
- **Rewrites** commit history using git filter-branch
- **Employs** sd (modern sed) for Unicode-safe text replacement
- **Preserves** file content unchanged

## Safety Features

Claude Cleaner prioritizes safety with multiple protection mechanisms. However, always ensure your repository is backed up before running any cleaning operations.

### Automatic Backups

- **Automatic creation**: Backup branches created before any modifications
- **Naming format**: `backup/pre-claude-clean-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SS-sssZ`
- **Easy recovery**: `git checkout backup/...` to restore previous state

### Dry Run Mode (Default)

> [!TIP]
> The tool runs in dry-run mode by default. Use `--execute` to apply changes.

```bash
# Preview file changes (dry-run is default)
claude-cleaner --files-only

# Preview commit changes (dry-run is default)
claude-cleaner --commits-only

# Preview full cleaning (dry-run is default)
claude-cleaner

# Execute after reviewing dry-run output
claude-cleaner --execute
```

### Validation Checks

- **Clean working tree**: Working tree must be clean before cleaning
- **Repository integrity**: Git repository integrity verified
- **Dependency validation**: All dependencies validated before execution

## Troubleshooting

Most issues can be resolved by ensuring dependencies are installed and you're in a clean Git repository. Use `--verbose` for detailed error information.

### Common Issues

#### "Missing dependencies" error

> [!TIP]
> The `--auto-install` flag handles dependency installation automatically.

```bash
# Auto-install all dependencies (recommended)
claude-cleaner check-deps --auto-install

# Or install tools manually
```

#### "Not a Git repository" error

```bash
# Specify a valid Git repository path
claude-cleaner /path/to/git/repo --auto-install

# For current directory
claude-cleaner . --auto-install
```

#### "Working tree not clean" error

Commit or stash your changes before running the cleaner to avoid losing work.

```bash
# Option 1: Commit changes
git add . && git commit -m "Save work before cleaning"

# Option 2: Stash changes temporarily
git stash
claude-cleaner --execute --auto-install
git stash pop
```

#### Permission errors

```bash
# On Unix/Linux, ensure proper permissions
chmod +x claude-cleaner

# May need elevated permissions for mise installation
sudo claude-cleaner check-deps --auto-install
```

### Getting Help

```bash
# Verbose dry-run output for debugging
claude-cleaner --verbose

# Check dependency status
claude-cleaner check-deps

# View help
claude-cleaner --help
```

### Recovery and Rollback

If something goes wrong or you need to undo changes, use these recovery steps.

```bash
# View available backups
git branch | grep backup/pre-claude-clean

# Restore from automatic backup
git checkout backup/pre-claude-clean-2024-01-15T10-30-00-000Z

# If you need to restore your main branch
git branch -f main backup/pre-claude-clean-2024-01-15T10-30-00-000Z
git checkout main

# Verify restoration
git log --oneline -10
```

> [!WARNING]
> After restoration, you may need to force push to remote repositories. See the Remote Repositories section below.

### Remote Repositories and Force Pushing

> [!CAUTION]
> Cleaning Git history rewrites commits, which requires force pushing to remote repositories. Force pushing can disrupt team workflows. All collaborators must re-clone or reset their local repositories after you force push.

**Before cleaning a shared repository:**

1. **Coordinate with team**: Ensure all collaborators have pushed their work
2. **Create remote backup**: `git push origin main:backup-main`
3. **Clean locally**: Run claude-cleaner with `--execute`
4. **Force push carefully**: `git push --force-with-lease origin main`

**Team recovery after force push:**

```bash
# Option 1: Reset existing repository (preserves uncommitted work)
git fetch origin
git reset --hard origin/main

# Option 2: Fresh clone (recommended for simplicity)
cd ..
mv old-repo old-repo-backup
git clone <repository-url>
```

## Frequently Asked Questions

### Safety and Recovery

**Q: Is it safe to use on important repositories?**\
**A:** Claude Cleaner creates automatic backups and runs in dry-run mode by default. Always review the dry-run output before using `--execute`.

**Q: Can I undo the changes?**\
**A:** Yes, backup branches are created automatically. Use `git checkout backup/pre-claude-clean-...` to restore your repository.

**Q: What if something goes wrong during cleaning?**\
**A:** Stop the process and restore from the automatic backup branch. Check the troubleshooting section for specific error resolution.

### Compatibility

**Q: What operating systems are supported?**\
**A:** Windows, macOS, and Linux are all supported, but Windows is not well-tested.

### Usage Options

**Q: What if I only want to remove files OR clean commits?**\
**A:** Use `--files-only` or `--commits-only` flags for selective cleaning operations.

**Q: Can I use it in CI/CD pipelines?**\
**A:** It should work but has not been tested. Use `--auto-install` for dependency management and ensure proper permissions are configured.

## Development

See [DEV.md](DEV.md) for development setup, testing guidelines, release process, and contribution instructions.

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please see [DEV.md](DEV.md) for development setup and contribution guidelines.

## Acknowledgments

- [BFG Repo-Cleaner](https://rtyley.github.io/bfg-repo-cleaner/) for efficient Git history cleaning
- [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) for development tool management
- [sd](https://github.com/chmln/sd) for modern text replacement
- [Deno](https://deno.land/) for the modern TypeScript runtime

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details

Commit message:

feat: preserve CLAUDE.md instruction files by default
BREAKING CHANGE: CLAUDE.md instruction files are now preserved by default
to keep project documentation intact.

- Add --include-instruction-files flag to explicitly remove CLAUDE.md files
- Update isClaudeFile() to exclude CLAUDE.md unless flag is set
- CLAUDE.md files are removed with --include-all-common-patterns
- Update all tests to reflect new default behavior
- Add new test validating --include-instruction-files flag
- Update README.md and PATTERNS.md with breaking change notice

This change makes the tool safer by default while allowing users to remove
instruction files when needed via explicit flag or comprehensive mode.

README.md, after:

# Claude Cleaner

[![CI](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![JSR](https://jsr.io/badges/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner)](https://jsr.io/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner)
[![JSR Score](https://jsr.io/badges/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner/score)](https://jsr.io/@tylerbu/claude-cleaner)
[![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/tylerbu/claude-cleaner)](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/releases/latest)
[![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Linux%20%7C%20macOS%20%7C%20Windows-lightgrey)](https://github.com/tylerbu/claude-cleaner/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](LICENSE)

A TypeScript/Deno tool to remove Claude artifacts from Git repositories.

> [!WARNING]
> Claude Cleaner was written primarily by Claude Sonnet 4.0 with direction and design from \@tylerbutler. Caveat emptor.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Features](#features)
- [What Gets Cleaned](#what-gets-cleaned)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)
- [Safety Features](#safety-features)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [Frequently Asked Questions](#frequently-asked-questions)
- [Development](#development)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [Acknowledgments](#acknowledgments)

## Overview

Claude Cleaner removes Claude-related files, commit trailers, and other artifacts from Git repository history. It combines BFG Repo-Cleaner for file removal with modern text processing for commit message cleaning.

## Features

- 🔒 **Safe**: Dry-run mode, automatic backups, and rollback capabilities
- 🌍 **Cross-platform**: Works on Windows, macOS, and Linux
- 📦 **Self-contained**: Compiles to a single binary with dependency auto-installation
- 🎯 **Flexible**: Files-only, commits-only, or full cleaning modes

## What Gets Cleaned

Claude Cleaner targets specific files and commit patterns created by Claude Code. Your regular project files and commit messages remain untouched.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Breaking Change (v0.3.0):** `CLAUDE.md` instruction files are now **preserved by default** to keep project documentation intact. Use `--include-instruction-files` or `--include-all-common-patterns` to remove them.

### Files Removed (Standard Mode)

The tool uses **exact basename matching** for safety. For example:

- **`.claude/`** matches only directories named exactly `.claude` (not `.claude2` or `my.claude`)
- **`.vscode/claude.json`** matches the exact path `.vscode/claude.json` only

**Standard patterns (CLAUDE.md files are preserved by default):**

- **`.claude/` directories** - Claude workspace configurations
- **`claudedocs/` directories** - Claude documentation (MCP server)
- **`.serena/` directories** - Serena MCP server data
- **`.vscode/claude.json`** - VSCode Claude extension settings
- **Temporary Claude files** - Auto-generated temporary files

**Preserved by default:**

- **`CLAUDE.md`** - Project instruction files (use `--include-instruction-files` to remove)

> [!TIP]
> Use `--include-dirs <name>` to match additional directories like `.claude-backup` or `claude-workspace` (matches by exact directory name anywhere in the repository)

### Extended Patterns (With `--include-all-common-patterns`)

This flag enables comprehensive cleanup by matching many more Claude-related file patterns across multiple categories:

- **Configuration files** - Settings, workspace, environment configs
- **Session & state** - Session data, cache, history files
- **Temporary files** - Working files, drafts, backups
- **Process files** - Lock files, PIDs, sockets
- **Debug files** - Debug logs, traces, profiles
- **Export files** - Archives, dumps, snapshots
- **IDE integration** - IDE-specific Claude configs
- **Documentation** - Notes, docs, instructions
- **Scripts** - Shell scripts, utilities, helpers
- **Hidden files** - Dotfiles like `.clauderc`
- **Versioned files** - Numbered or versioned variants

See [PATTERNS.md](PATTERNS.md) for the complete pattern reference with examples and detailed explanations.

> [!WARNING]
> The `--include-all-common-patterns` flag finds _many_ more files than standard mode. Always review the dry-run output first before using `--execute`.

### Commit Trailers Removed

- **`🤖 Generated with [Claude Code](...)`** - Claude attribution trailers
- **`Co-Authored-By: Claude <noreply@anthropic.com>`** - Co-authorship attributions
- **Other Claude attribution lines** - Additional Claude-generated metadata

## Installation

### Prerequisites

The tool automatically installs all required dependencies via [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) when using the `--auto-install` flag. Manual installation is optional.

**Auto-installed dependencies:**

- Java (for BFG Repo-Cleaner)
- sd (modern sed replacement)

### Install Claude Cleaner

```bash
# Option 1: Install from JSR (recommended)
deno install -A jsr:@tylerbu/claude-cleaner

# Option 2: Download pre-built binary
# Download from GitHub releases page

# Option 3: Build from source (requires Deno)
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/claude-cleaner  # Replace with actual repository URL
cd claude-cleaner
deno compile --allow-all --output claude-cleaner src/main.ts
```

## Quick Start

> [!WARNING]
> Always backup your repository or ensure it's committed to a remote before cleaning. While automatic backups are created, having an external backup provides extra safety.

```bash
# 1. Check dependencies (auto-installs if needed)
claude-cleaner check-deps --auto-install

# 2. Preview changes without modifying anything (dry-run is the default)
claude-cleaner

# 3. Execute cleaning (only after reviewing dry-run output)
claude-cleaner --execute
```

## Usage

### Command Line Options

```
Usage: claude-cleaner [options] [path]

Options:
  -h, --help                        Show help
  -V, --version                     Show version
  -x, --execute                     Execute changes (default: dry-run mode shows what would be changed)
  -v, --verbose                     Enable verbose output
  --auto-install                    Automatically install required dependencies
  --files-only                      Only remove Claude files (skip commit cleaning)
  --commits-only                    Only clean commit messages (skip file removal)
  --branch <branch>                 Specify branch to clean (default: HEAD)
  --include-all-common-patterns     Include ALL known common Claude patterns (for complete cleanup)
  --include-instruction-files       Include CLAUDE.md instruction files for removal (preserved by default)
  --include-dirs <name>             Add directory name to remove (matches directories with this name anywhere)
  --include-dirs-file <file>        Read directory names from file (one pattern per line)
  --no-defaults                     Don't include default Claude patterns (use only explicit patterns)

Arguments:
  <repo-path>                       Path to Git repository (REQUIRED)

Commands:
  check-deps                        Check if all required dependencies are available
```

### Basic Examples

```bash
# Preview changes (default behavior)
claude-cleaner .

# Execute cleaning after reviewing dry-run
claude-cleaner . --execute

# Clean specific repository
claude-cleaner /path/to/repo --execute

# Preview with verbose output
claude-cleaner . --verbose

# Check what dependencies are needed
claude-cleaner check-deps
```

### Selective Cleaning

```bash
# Preview file removal only
claude-cleaner . --files-only --auto-install

# Execute file removal only
claude-cleaner . --files-only --execute --auto-install

# Preview commit message cleaning only
claude-cleaner . --commits-only --auto-install

# Execute commit cleaning on specific branch
claude-cleaner . --commits-only --execute --branch feature/my-branch --auto-install
```

### Comprehensive Cleaning

Use `--include-all-common-patterns` for complete Claude artifact removal, especially for long-running projects or when preparing repositories for distribution.

```bash
# Preview comprehensive cleanup (recommended first)
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --verbose

# Execute complete cleanup - find ALL known/possible Claude patterns
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --execute

# Preview comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --verbose

# Execute comprehensive file-only cleanup
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --files-only --execute
```

### Removing Instruction Files

By default, `CLAUDE.md` instruction files are preserved to keep project documentation intact. To remove them:

```bash
# Remove CLAUDE.md files along with other Claude artifacts
claude-cleaner --include-instruction-files --execute

# Or use comprehensive mode (includes instruction files automatically)
claude-cleaner --include-all-common-patterns --execute
```

### Advanced Workflows

These examples show advanced usage patterns for power users and troubleshooting scenarios.

```bash
# Manual dependency setup (alternative to --auto-install)
mise install java@temurin-21
mise install sd
claude-cleaner --execute

# Verbose dry-run output for troubleshooting
claude-cleaner --verbose

# Check dependencies without installing
claude-cleaner check-deps

# Execute with verbose output
claude-cleaner --execute --verbose --auto-install

# Custom directory patterns (can be specified multiple times)
claude-cleaner --include-dirs "claude-backup" --include-dirs "claude-workspace"

# Read directory patterns from file
echo "claude-backup" > dirs.txt
echo "claude-workspace" >> dirs.txt
claude-cleaner --include-dirs-file dirs.txt

# Use only custom patterns (exclude defaults)
claude-cleaner --no-defaults --include-dirs "my-claude-files"
```

## How It Works

Claude Cleaner follows a systematic, safety-first approach to ensure your repository integrity while removing Claude artifacts.

### Step-by-Step Process

1. **🔍 Dependency Check** - Verifies Java, BFG Repo-Cleaner, and sd are available (auto-installs via mise if needed)
2. **✅ Repository Validation** - Ensures you're in a valid Git repository with clean working tree
3. **💾 Backup Creation** - Creates backup branches before making any changes
4. **📁 File Removal** - Uses BFG Repo-Cleaner to efficiently remove Claude files from Git history
5. **✏️ Commit Cleaning** - Uses git filter-branch + sd to clean commit messages and trailers
6. **🔎 Verification** - Validates all changes were applied correctly

### Two-Phase Cleaning Process

#### Phase 1: File Removal (`--files-only`)

- **Scans** repository for Claude files (`CLAUDE.md`, `.claude/`, `.vscode/claude.json`, etc.)
- **Removes** files from entire Git history using BFG Repo-Cleaner
- **Creates** backup before any modifications
- **Preserves** commit messages unchanged

#### Phase 2: Commit Cleaning (`--commits-only`)

- **Analyzes** commit messages for Claude trailers and attributions
- **Rewrites** commit history using git filter-branch
- **Employs** sd (modern sed) for Unicode-safe text replacement
- **Preserves** file content unchanged

## Safety Features

Claude Cleaner prioritizes safety with multiple protection mechanisms. However, always ensure your repository is backed up before running any cleaning operations.

### Automatic Backups

- **Automatic creation**: Backup branches created before any modifications
- **Naming format**: `backup/pre-claude-clean-YYYY-MM-DDTHH-MM-SS-sssZ`
- **Easy recovery**: `git checkout backup/...` to restore previous state

### Dry Run Mode (Default)

> [!TIP]
> The tool runs in dry-run mode by default. Use `--execute` to apply changes.

```bash
# Preview file changes (dry-run is default)
claude-cleaner --files-only

# Preview commit changes (dry-run is default)
claude-cleaner --commits-only

# Preview full cleaning (dry-run is default)
claude-cleaner

# Execute after reviewing dry-run output
claude-cleaner --execute
```

### Validation Checks

- **Clean working tree**: Working tree must be clean before cleaning
- **Repository integrity**: Git repository integrity verified
- **Dependency validation**: All dependencies validated before execution

## Troubleshooting

Most issues can be resolved by ensuring dependencies are installed and you're in a clean Git repository. Use `--verbose` for detailed error information.

### Common Issues

#### "Missing dependencies" error

> [!TIP]
> The `--auto-install` flag handles dependency installation automatically.

```bash
# Auto-install all dependencies (recommended)
claude-cleaner check-deps --auto-install

# Or install tools manually
```

#### "Not a Git repository" error

```bash
# Specify a valid Git repository path
claude-cleaner /path/to/git/repo --auto-install

# For current directory
claude-cleaner . --auto-install
```

#### "Working tree not clean" error

Commit or stash your changes before running the cleaner to avoid losing work.

```bash
# Option 1: Commit changes
git add . && git commit -m "Save work before cleaning"

# Option 2: Stash changes temporarily
git stash
claude-cleaner --execute --auto-install
git stash pop
```

#### Permission errors

```bash
# On Unix/Linux, ensure proper permissions
chmod +x claude-cleaner

# May need elevated permissions for mise installation
sudo claude-cleaner check-deps --auto-install
```

### Getting Help

```bash
# Verbose dry-run output for debugging
claude-cleaner --verbose

# Check dependency status
claude-cleaner check-deps

# View help
claude-cleaner --help
```

### Recovery and Rollback

If something goes wrong or you need to undo changes, use these recovery steps.

```bash
# View available backups
git branch | grep backup/pre-claude-clean

# Restore from automatic backup
git checkout backup/pre-claude-clean-2024-01-15T10-30-00-000Z

# If you need to restore your main branch
git branch -f main backup/pre-claude-clean-2024-01-15T10-30-00-000Z
git checkout main

# Verify restoration
git log --oneline -10
```

> [!WARNING]
> After restoration, you may need to force push to remote repositories. See the Remote Repositories section below.

### Remote Repositories and Force Pushing

> [!CAUTION]
> Cleaning Git history rewrites commits, which requires force pushing to remote repositories. Force pushing can disrupt team workflows. All collaborators must re-clone or reset their local repositories after you force push.

**Before cleaning a shared repository:**

1. **Coordinate with team**: Ensure all collaborators have pushed their work
2. **Create remote backup**: `git push origin main:backup-main`
3. **Clean locally**: Run claude-cleaner with `--execute`
4. **Force push carefully**: `git push --force-with-lease origin main`

**Team recovery after force push:**

```bash
# Option 1: Reset existing repository (preserves uncommitted work)
git fetch origin
git reset --hard origin/main

# Option 2: Fresh clone (recommended for simplicity)
cd ..
mv old-repo old-repo-backup
git clone <repository-url>
```

## Frequently Asked Questions

### Safety and Recovery

**Q: Is it safe to use on important repositories?**\
**A:** Claude Cleaner creates automatic backups and runs in dry-run mode by default. Always review the dry-run output before using `--execute`.

**Q: Can I undo the changes?**\
**A:** Yes, backup branches are created automatically. Use `git checkout backup/pre-claude-clean-...` to restore your repository.

**Q: What if something goes wrong during cleaning?**\
**A:** Stop the process and restore from the automatic backup branch. Check the troubleshooting section for specific error resolution.

### Compatibility

**Q: What operating systems are supported?**\
**A:** Windows, macOS, and Linux are all supported, but Windows is not well-tested.

### Usage Options

**Q: What if I only want to remove files OR clean commits?**\
**A:** Use `--files-only` or `--commits-only` flags for selective cleaning operations.

**Q: Can I use it in CI/CD pipelines?**\
**A:** It should work but has not been tested. Use `--auto-install` for dependency management and ensure proper permissions are configured.

## Development

See [DEV.md](DEV.md) for development setup, testing guidelines, release process, and contribution instructions.

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please see [DEV.md](DEV.md) for development setup and contribution guidelines.

## Acknowledgments

- [BFG Repo-Cleaner](https://rtyley.github.io/bfg-repo-cleaner/) for efficient Git history cleaning
- [mise](https://mise.jdx.dev/) for development tool management
- [sd](https://github.com/chmln/sd) for modern text replacement
- [Deno](https://deno.land/) for the modern TypeScript runtime

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details
